Dengue is a mosquito-borne viral disease that has rapidly spread in all regions of WHO in recent years. Dengue virus is transmitted by female mosquitoes mainly of the species Aedes aegypti and, to a lesser extent, Ae. albopictus. These mosquitoes are also vectors of chikungunya, yellow fever and Zika viruses. Dengue is widespread throughout the tropics, with local variations in risk influenced by rainfall, temperature, relative humidity and unplanned rapid urbanization.
Dengue causes a wide spectrum of disease. This can range from subclinical disease (people may not know they are even infected) to severe flu-like symptoms in those infected. Although less common, some people develop severe dengue, which can be any number of complications associated with severe bleeding, organ impairment and/or plasma leakage. Severe dengue has a higher risk of death when not managed appropriately. Severe dengue was first recognized in the 1950s during dengue epidemics in the Philippines and Thailand. Today, severe dengue affects most Asian and Latin American countries and has become a leading cause of hospitalization and death among children and adults in these regions.
Dengue is caused by a virus of the Flaviviridae family and there are four distinct, but closely related, serotypes of the virus that cause dengue (DENV-1, DENV-2, DENV-3 and DENV-4). Recovery from infection is believed to provide lifelong immunity against that serotype. However, cross-immunity to the other serotypes after recovery is only partial, and temporary. Subsequent infections (secondary infection) by other serotypes increase the risk of developing severe dengue.
Dengue has distinct epidemiological patterns, associated with the four serotypes of the virus. These can co-circulate within a region, and indeed many countries are hyper-endemic for all four serotypes. Dengue has an alarming impact on both human health and the global and national economies. DENV is frequently transported from one place to another by infected travellers; when susceptible vectors are present in these new areas, there is the potential for local transmission to be established.
Dengue is a severe, flu-like illness that affects infants, young children and adults, but seldom causes death. Symptoms usually last for 2–7 days, after an incubation period of 4–10 days after the bite from an infected mosquito. The World Health Organization classifies dengue into 2 major categories: dengue (with / without warning signs) and severe dengue. Dengue should be suspected when a high fever (40°C/104°F) is accompanied by 2 of the following symptoms during the febrile phase: severe headache, pain behind the eyes, muscle and joint pains, nausea, vomiting, swollen glands or rashes. A patient enters what is called the critical phase normally about 3-7 days after illness onset. It is at this time, when the fever is dropping (below 38°C/100°F) in the patient, that warning signs associated with severe dengue can manifest. Severe dengue is a potentially fatal complication, due to plasma leaking, fluid accumulation, respiratory distress, severe bleeding, or organ impairment.
The virus is transmitted to humans through the bites of infected female mosquitoes, primarily the Aedes aegypti mosquito. Other species within the Aedes genus can also act as vectors, but their contribution is secondary to Aedes aegypti. These mosquitoes typically lay eggs near standing water in containers that hold water, like buckets, bowls, animal dishes, flower pots, and vases. These mosquitoes prefer to bite people, and live both indoors and outdoors near people. Mosquitoes become infected when they bite a person infected with the virus. Infected mosquitoes can then spread the virus to other people through bites. Further, a pregnant woman already infected with dengue can pass the virus to her fetus during pregnancy or around the time of birth. Rarely, dengue can be spread through blood transfusion, organ transplant, or through a needle stick injury.
Reduce Mosquito Habitat:
The mosquitoes which breed dengue thrive in stagnant water containing objects like tires, plastic covers, flower pots, pet’s water bowls, etc. Reducing the habitat available for these mosquitoes (by getting rid of stagnant water to breed) can help prevent dengue.
Stay in well-screened houses:
Ensure that the windows are closed properly or the door screens do not contain any holes. This would eliminate the chances of any mosquitoes entering the house.
Use Mosquito Repellents:
Using mosquito repellents, especially in tropical areas with high populations and crowds, can help repel mosquitoes from biting you. Apply mosquito repellent creams on your body when travelling to tropical destinations and even when you are indoors.
Wear Protective Clothing:
In order to avoid being bitten by mosquitoes, one can go for long-sleeved clothes and full pants with socks & covered shoes. It is advisable to go for this kind of protective clothing specifically in dengue-infested areas.
Sleep Under Mosquito-net:
Sleeping under the mosquito net can provide you and your children a double layer of protection from being bitten by mosquitoes.   